README_en.md, before:

# AIwork4translator

[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11%2B-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Precise technical-document translation powered by glossary-aware prompts and robust Markdown segmentation. This project provides both CLI and WebUI with a unified module layer.

## Latest Update (2025/12/06)

We’ve shipped an exciting refactor focused on Dynamic Terminology Management, dramatically improving stability and consistency for long-form document translation:

- Terminology union matching: newly detected terms are collected during translation and unioned with the CSV glossary for matching, maximizing term hits.
- Controlled merge switch: at the end, choose whether to merge new terms back into the glossary; if not, a separate “new-terms CSV” is exported for review.
- Paragraph-level retries: transient API hiccups no longer break the flow; failures reset on the next success.
- Proper-noun matching optimization: better case handling for names like HOPKINS/Hopkins without harmful lemmatization.
- Structured output and prompts: translation and notes are separated; notes are list-form and include reasons for new terminology choices, closing the review loop.

Plan change: the “empty glossary generation” feature is temporarily deprecated due to insufficient effectiveness; it may be rebuilt or removed.

## Table of Contents
- Overview
- Key Features
- Project Structure (Unified Root)
- Installation
- Quick Start (uv)
- Usage
  - CLI
  - WebUI
- Environment & Defaults
- Testing
- FAQ
- Changelog & Migration Notes
- Roadmap
- Contact

## Overview
AIwork4translator focuses on translating technical documents while preserving terminology accuracy. It detects and protects domain-specific terms and provides an editor workflow to review translations efficiently.

### Principles
- **Glossary-first prompts**: Aho-Corasick automaton and regex matching identify domain terms per segment; prompts instruct the model to use exact translations consistently.
- **High Efficiency**: Compared to typical RAG uploads for small glossaries, early tests show ~99% less extra token overhead and ~35% more term hits. Overall quality improves due to stable terminology.
- **Adaptive**: Supports plural normalization (e.g., "outlaws" -> "outlaw") and smart article handling ("the Outlaw" matches "an outlaw").
- **Continuous Improvement**: Since no glossary can be complete, newly detected terms are automatically highlighted/summarized in the output to aid review and glossary updates.

## Key Features
- **Terminology detection & protection**: Efficient Aho-Corasick matching with plural/article normalization.
- **Multi-format input support**: Native `.md/.txt`, and conversion for PDF/Word/Excel/HTML via MarkItDown.
- **Multiple LLM providers**: Kimi, OpenAI (GPT), DeepSeek, and optional local models via Ollama.
- **CLI and WebUI modes**: Unified core logic with interactive CLI and feature-rich WebUI.
- **CLI Preference Memory**: Automatically remembers last used provider and file paths for faster startup.
- **Two-column Markdown editor**: WebUI split-view (original vs translation) with live progress.
- **Real-time progress**: Live polling and safe autosave after completion.
- **Interactive confirmation**: For non-Markdown conversion steps.
- **Optional empty glossary generation**: Via NER (CLI) (Note: planned temporary deprecation; see Roadmap).
- **Structured translation**: Smart segmentation based on Markdown headers.
- **Dynamic terminology management (refactor core)**: Real-time union of new terms with the CSV glossary for matching; end-of-run merge switch; paragraph-level retries for stability.

## Project Structure (Unified Root)
```
project_root/
├── data/
│   ├── .env
│   └── README_en.md
├── models/
│   └── dbmdz/bert-large-cased-finetuned-conll03-english-for-ner/
├── modules/
│   ├── api_tool.py          # LLMService, returns (content, tokens), no RAG cache
│   ├── config.py            # GlobalConfig (env-first)
│   ├── read_tool.py         # Structured Markdown segmentation
│   ├── count_tool.py        # Paragraph counting (mirrors segmentation logic)
│   ├── csv_process_tool.py  # Aho-Corasick term matching & CSV validation
│   ├── markitdown_tool.py   # Non-Markdown → Markdown conversion
│   ├── write_out_tool.py    # Structured/flat writing (no "# end" by default)
│   └── ner_list_tool.py     # Robust model path detection (prefers root models/)
├── templates/
│   ├── index.html
│   └── editor.html
├── static/
│   ├── style.css
│   ├── script.js
│   └── editor.js
├── uploads/
├── app.py                   # WebUI entry (provides main())
├── main.py                  # CLI entry (interactive, with preference persistence)
├── baseline.py              # Baseline CLI (unified API call, no RAG cache)
├── ner_list_check.py        # NER-based glossary generator
└── pyproject.toml           # Scripts: CLI/WebUI
```

## Installation
- Requirements: Python 3.11+
- Dependency manager: `uv`
- Virtual environment: `.venv` (default)

```
uv sync
```

## Quick Start (uv)
```
# Sync project dependencies (creates .venv)
uv sync

# Install / remove dependencies
uv add <package>
uv remove <package>

# Run CLI (recommended)
uv run main.py
# Or
python main.py

# Run WebUI
python app.py
# Or script entry
program-translator-webui

# Run tests
python -m pytest
```

## Important Notes for Translation

- **Configuration & secrets**: Set API keys in `data/.env` and never commit secrets. On ≥3 consecutive API failures, run the CLI API test and check your network/proxy. Kimi defaults: `BASE_URL=https://api.moonshot.cn/v1`, `MODEL=kimi-k2-turbo-preview`.
- **Glossary quality & performance**: CSV must have 2 columns, UTF-8 encoding, no empty rows, and unique source terms. Large glossaries are supported efficiently via Aho-Corasick algorithm. Plural forms are automatically handled.
- **CLI Preferences**: The CLI remembers your last choices (provider, file paths) in `data/.prefs.json`. Press Enter to accept the default value shown in `[...]`.
- **Input & structure**: Prefer native Markdown. Non-Markdown files are auto-converted; please review the converted file before continuing. Structured mode relies on heading levels—use `#`/`##` reasonably.
- **Paragraphs & large files**: Very long paragraphs are split intelligently. Large files take longer; WebUI recommends ≤10MB. CLI shows progress as `[current/total]`.
- **Consistency**: Lower `temperature` improves term consistency. The prompt explicitly injects term mappings to stabilize outputs.
- **Local models**: For Ollama, set `OLLAMA_BASE_URL` and `OLLAMA_MODEL` in `.env`. Ensure the service is running before use.
- **Logging & outputs**: CLI prints `Total time: xh xm xs` (Chinese format enabled). `counting_table.csv` records raw seconds and tokens. WebUI logs include timestamps.

## Usage
### CLI
- Run `uv run main.py` (or `python main.py`)
- Select the provider (kimi/gpt/deepseek/ollama) - defaults to last used
- Enter the input file path - defaults to last used
  - If the file is not Markdown, it will be converted via MarkItDown and you will be prompted to continue (y/n)
- If you don’t have a glossary, choose `n` to generate an empty glossary via NER, then exit and fill the translation column
- If you have a glossary, provide the CSV path and proceed with translation
  - Supports `.xlsx` input (auto-converted to `.csv`)
- Progress prints: `Translating segment [current]/[total]`

### WebUI
- Run `uv run app.py`
- Open `http://localhost:8008/`
- On the home page:
  - Upload original file (`.md` or convertible format) and validate
  - Upload glossary CSV and validate
  - Choose provider, click “Use Two-Column Editor”, then in the editor page click “Start Translation”
- Endpoints tested: `/validate-file`, `/start-translation`, `/translation-progress`, `/save-content`, `/download`, `/open-file`
- After completion, autosave checks every ~20 seconds

## Environment & Defaults
- Environment file: `data/.env`
- Default provider config for Kimi:
  - `KIMI_BASE_URL=https://api.moonshot.cn/v1`
  - `model=kimi-k2-turbo-preview`
- Suggested parameters: `max_tokens=2048`, `temperature=0.7`, `top_p=0.95`
- Keep API keys secure and do not commit to the repository

## Testing
- Run all tests: `python -m pytest`
- Tests are aligned to the unified root structure

## FAQ
- The editor shows progress as segments are processed; content updates incrementally
- Non-Markdown files are converted and require a user confirmation before translation
- Default writing mode does not append `# end` in flat mode (to match CLI/WebUI behavior)

## Changelog & Migration Notes
- 2025-12-04: Added CLI preference persistence, Aho-Corasick term matching optimization, and plural/article normalization.
- 2025-11-29: Unified root structure (merged CLI/WebUI), removed RAG cache, aligned modules, updated script entries, cleaned legacy directories

## Roadmap
- v1.2.0: Core features completed (CLI, WebUI, provider support, unified modules).
- Future versions:
  - Enhance Markdown parsing performance with MinerU.
  - Add a CAT-like interactive table view (source/target aligned per sentence) for efficient editing.
  - ~~Support real-time glossary updates: auto-adding unfamiliar terms during translation and allowing quick edits.~~ Completed: Dynamic Terminology Management (union matching, merge switch, new-term collection/export).
  - ~~Improve empty glossary generation: include type plus translation suggestions for faster review.~~ New plan: temporarily deprecate blank glossary generation due to poor effectiveness; may be rebuilt or removed.

## Contact
Email: chasen0315@gmail.com (reply within 24 hours by 2025-12-29)

Commit message:

feat(terminology): 增强术语管理功能并优化API错误处理
- 新增save_terms_result函数统一处理术语保存逻辑，支持合并与单独保存选项
- 修复dict_to_df空列表处理，返回包含标准列的DataFrame
- 优化save_glossary_df文件名生成逻辑，保留原文件名前缀
- 增强API JSON格式错误处理，新增自动修复与段落级重试机制
- 添加中断保护功能，支持保存进度和未翻译内容
- 完善测试覆盖，新增术语保存和中断恢复相关测试用例

README_en.md, after:

# AIwork4translator

[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11%2B-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Precise technical-document translation powered by glossary-aware prompts and robust Markdown segmentation. This project provides both CLI and WebUI with a unified module layer.

## Latest Update (2025/12/09)

We have continuously optimized the robustness and interaction experience of the program, adding comprehensive protection mechanisms for abnormal scenarios and improving the dynamic terminology management function:

### 🛡️ Exception Protection and Interruption Recovery
- **Interactive Failure Recovery**: When the number of consecutive API failures reaches the limit, the program no longer exits directly, but pauses and offers options: users can choose to "reset failure count and continue retrying" or "save current progress and exit".
- **Manual Interruption Protection**: Captures `Ctrl+C` interrupt signals to ensure that the accumulated glossary and remaining untranslated original text can be safely saved when the user manually stops the program.
- **Resume Support**: The program automatically locates and saves the untranslated part as a `_rest.md` file, facilitating subsequent translation continuation.
- **API Content Auto-Repair**: Implemented automatic detection and paragraph-level retry mechanisms for JSON format errors returned by the API, preventing program crashes caused by single parsing failures.

### 🚀 Interaction Experience and Terminology Management
- **CLI Preference Memory**: Automatically loads the last used API platform, file path, and other configurations at startup; simply press Enter to reuse them.
- **Terminology Union Matching**: Real-time collection of "new terms" during translation, forming a union with the CSV glossary for matching to maximize term hit rate.
- **Controllable Merge Switch**: At the end of translation or upon interruption, users can interactively choose whether to merge newly collected terms into the original glossary; if not merged, they are automatically exported as an independent CSV file (`original_filename_timestamp.csv`).
- **Proper Noun Matching Optimization**: More robust case normalization for all-uppercase/capitalized proper nouns (e.g., HOPKINS/Hopkins).

> Plan Change: Due to the current suboptimal performance of the "Blank Glossary Generation" function, it has been decided to temporarily remove it. It may be refactored or discontinued in the future depending on the situation.

## Table of Contents
- Overview
- Key Features
- Project Structure (Unified Root)
- Installation
- Quick Start (uv)
- Usage
  - CLI
  - WebUI
- Environment & Defaults
- Testing
- FAQ
- Changelog & Migration Notes
- Roadmap
- Contact

## Overview
AIwork4translator focuses on translating technical documents while preserving terminology accuracy. It detects and protects domain-specific terms and provides an editor workflow to review translations efficiently.

### Principles
- **Glossary-first prompts**: Aho-Corasick automaton and regex matching identify domain terms per segment; prompts instruct the model to use exact translations consistently.
- **High Efficiency**: Compared to typical RAG uploads for small glossaries, early tests show ~99% less extra token overhead and ~35% more term hits. Overall quality improves due to stable terminology.
- **Adaptive**: Supports plural normalization (e.g., "outlaws" -> "outlaw") and smart article handling ("the Outlaw" matches "an outlaw").
- **Continuous Improvement**: Since no glossary can be complete, newly detected terms are automatically highlighted/summarized in the output to aid review and glossary updates.

## Key Features
- **Terminology detection & protection**: Efficient Aho-Corasick matching with plural/article normalization.
- **Multi-format input support**: Native `.md/.txt`, and conversion for PDF/Word/Excel/HTML via MarkItDown.
- **Multiple LLM providers**: Kimi, OpenAI (GPT), DeepSeek, and optional local models via Ollama.
- **CLI and WebUI modes**: Unified core logic with interactive CLI and feature-rich WebUI.
- **CLI Preference Memory**: Automatically remembers last used provider and file paths for faster startup.
- **Two-column Markdown editor**: WebUI split-view (original vs translation) with live progress.
- **Real-time progress**: Live polling and safe autosave after completion.
- **Interruption Protection & Recovery**: Supports Ctrl+C safe interruption, automatically saving progress and untranslated content.
- **Interactive Failure Recovery**: Provides pause and retry options upon consecutive API failures to prevent accidental task termination.
- **Interactive confirmation**: For non-Markdown conversion steps.
- **Optional empty glossary generation**: Via NER (CLI) (Note: planned temporary deprecation; see Roadmap).
- **Structured translation**: Smart segmentation based on Markdown headers.
- **Dynamic terminology management (refactor core)**: Real-time union of new terms with the CSV glossary for matching; end-of-run merge switch; paragraph-level retries for stability.

## Project Structure (Unified Root)
```
project_root/
├── data/
│   ├── .env
│   └── README_en.md
├── models/
│   └── dbmdz/bert-large-cased-finetuned-conll03-english-for-ner/
├── modules/
│   ├── api_tool.py          # LLMService, returns (content, tokens), no RAG cache
│   ├── config.py            # GlobalConfig (env-first)
│   ├── read_tool.py         # Structured Markdown segmentation
│   ├── count_tool.py        # Paragraph counting (mirrors segmentation logic)
│   ├── csv_process_tool.py  # Aho-Corasick term matching & CSV validation
│   ├── markitdown_tool.py   # Non-Markdown → Markdown conversion
│   ├── write_out_tool.py    # Structured/flat writing (no "# end" by default)
│   └── ner_list_tool.py     # Robust model path detection (prefers root models/)
├── templates/
│   ├── index.html
│   └── editor.html
├── static/
│   ├── style.css
│   ├── script.js
│   └── editor.js
├── uploads/
├── app.py                   # WebUI entry (provides main())
├── main.py                  # CLI entry (interactive, with preference persistence)
├── baseline.py              # Baseline CLI (unified API call, no RAG cache)
├── ner_list_check.py        # NER-based glossary generator
└── pyproject.toml           # Scripts: CLI/WebUI
```

## Installation
- Requirements: Python 3.11+
- Dependency manager: `uv`
- Virtual environment: `.venv` (default)

```
uv sync
```

## Quick Start (uv)
```
# Sync project dependencies (creates .venv)
uv sync

# Install / remove dependencies
uv add <package>
uv remove <package>

# Run CLI (recommended)
uv run main.py
# Or
python main.py

# Run WebUI
python app.py
# Or script entry
program-translator-webui

# Run tests
python -m pytest
```

## Important Notes for Translation

- **Configuration & secrets**: Set API keys in `data/.env` and never commit secrets. On ≥3 consecutive API failures, run the CLI API test and check your network/proxy. Kimi defaults: `BASE_URL=https://api.moonshot.cn/v1`, `MODEL=kimi-k2-turbo-preview`.
- **Glossary quality & performance**: CSV must have 2 columns, UTF-8 encoding, no empty rows, and unique source terms. Large glossaries are supported efficiently via Aho-Corasick algorithm. Plural forms are automatically handled.
- **CLI Preferences**: The CLI remembers your last choices (provider, file paths) in `data/.prefs.json`. Press Enter to accept the default value shown in `[...]`.
- **Input & structure**: Prefer native Markdown. Non-Markdown files are auto-converted; please review the converted file before continuing. Structured mode relies on heading levels—use `#`/`##` reasonably.
- **Paragraphs & large files**: Very long paragraphs are split intelligently. Large files take longer; WebUI recommends ≤10MB. CLI shows progress as `[current/total]`.
- **Consistency**: Lower `temperature` improves term consistency. The prompt explicitly injects term mappings to stabilize outputs.
- **Local models**: For Ollama, set `OLLAMA_BASE_URL` and `OLLAMA_MODEL` in `.env`. Ensure the service is running before use.
- **Logging & outputs**: CLI prints `Total time: xh xm xs` (Chinese format enabled). `counting_table.csv` records raw seconds and tokens. WebUI logs include timestamps.

## Usage
### CLI
- Run `uv run main.py` (or `python main.py`)
- Select the provider (kimi/gpt/deepseek/ollama) - defaults to last used
- Enter the input file path - defaults to last used
  - If the file is not Markdown, it will be converted via MarkItDown and you will be prompted to continue (y/n)
#### Glossary Handling

1. If you don't have a glossary CSV, enter `n`. The program will automatically create a blank glossary file.
   - Filename format: `[Original_Filename]_output_terminology.csv`
   - You can fill in this file after translation (or interruption) for future use.
   - *Note: NER-based automatic generation is temporarily deprecated.*

2. If you have a glossary CSV, enter `y` to provide the file path.
   - Enter the path to your CSV glossary (direct `.xlsx` input is supported; it will be auto-converted).
   - **New Term Merge Option**:
     - After entering the path, you will be asked: "Merge new terms into the glossary? (y/n)".
     - Select `y`: Newly discovered terms will be appended to your original CSV (deduplicated) and saved as a backup.
     - Select `n`: New terms will be saved separately in a new CSV file, leaving the original file untouched.

### WebUI
- Run `uv run app.py`
- Open `http://localhost:8008/`
- On the home page:
  - Upload original file (`.md` or convertible format) and validate
  - Upload glossary CSV and validate
  - Choose provider, click “Use Two-Column Editor”, then in the editor page click “Start Translation”
- Endpoints tested: `/validate-file`, `/start-translation`, `/translation-progress`, `/save-content`, `/download`, `/open-file`
- After completion, autosave checks every ~20 seconds

## Environment & Defaults
- Environment file: `data/.env`
- Default provider config for Kimi:
  - `KIMI_BASE_URL=https://api.moonshot.cn/v1`
  - `model=kimi-k2-turbo-preview`
- Suggested parameters: `max_tokens=2048`, `temperature=0.7`, `top_p=0.95`
- Keep API keys secure and do not commit to the repository

## Testing
- Run all tests: `python -m pytest`
- Tests are aligned to the unified root structure

## FAQ
- The editor shows progress as segments are processed; content updates incrementally
- Non-Markdown files are converted and require a user confirmation before translation
- Default writing mode does not append `# end` in flat mode (to match CLI/WebUI behavior)

## Changelog & Migration Notes
- 2025-12-04: Added CLI preference persistence, Aho-Corasick term matching optimization, and plural/article normalization.
- 2025-11-29: Unified root structure (merged CLI/WebUI), removed RAG cache, aligned modules, updated script entries, cleaned legacy directories

## Roadmap
- v1.2.0: Core features completed (CLI, WebUI, provider support, unified modules).
- Future versions:
  - Enhance Markdown parsing performance with MinerU.
  - Add a CAT-like interactive table view (source/target aligned per sentence) for efficient editing.
  - ~~Support real-time glossary updates: auto-adding unfamiliar terms during translation and allowing quick edits.~~ Completed: Dynamic Terminology Management (union matching, merge switch, new-term collection/export).
  - ~~Improve empty glossary generation: include type plus translation suggestions for faster review.~~ New plan: temporarily deprecate blank glossary generation due to poor effectiveness; may be rebuilt or removed.

## Contact
Email: chasen0315@gmail.com (reply within 24 hours by 2025-12-29)
